Effects of Caffeine on Human Health

A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis

Authors: Smith, John A., Johnson, Jane B., Williams, Robert C.

Affiliations:
1. Department of Medicine, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States
2. Center for Health Research, Boston Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts, United States
3. Department of Nutrition, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut, United States

Contact: rwilliams@yale.edu

Published: April 18, 2005
Volume: 2, Issue: 4

Background
Caffeine is one of the most widely consumed psychoactive substances in the world.

Methods and Findings
We conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis of studies examining the effects of caffeine on human health.

Conclusions
Moderate caffeine consumption appears to have both beneficial and adverse health effects.

Keywords: caffeine, meta-analysis, systematic review, human health

Article Type: research-article

Introduction

Caffeine (1,3,7-trimethylxanthine) is a stimulant of the central nervous system.
This review examines the evidence for both beneficial and adverse effects of caffeine consumption.

Methods

Search Strategy
We searched MEDLINE, Embase, and the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials.

Selection Criteria
We included randomized controlled trials and observational studies examining caffeine effects.

Results

We identified 47 studies meeting inclusion criteria.

Table 1: Characteristics of Included Studies
Summary of study design and population characteristics.

Study | Year | Population | Outcome
Study A | 2003 | 100 adults | Increased alertness
Study B | 2004 | 50 subjects | Sleep disruption

Discussion

Our findings suggest that caffeine has complex effects on human health.
Low to moderate consumption may provide cognitive benefits, while high doses may lead to adverse effects.

Conclusions

Caffeine consumption should be tailored to individual tolerance and health status.

Acknowledgments

We thank all participants who contributed to this research.

References

1. Brown, T and Davis, K. Cognitive effects of caffeine. J Neurosci. 2002;15:234-241.
2. Green, M. Adverse effects of high caffeine consumption. Am J Health. 2003;8:112-120.

Supplementary Material

Supplementary Material 1: Additional data and statistical analyses
